README.rst, before:

PyGSL: Python interface for GNU Scientific Library
==================================================

PyGSL is a Python wrapper for the `GNU Scientific Library (GSL) <http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_. Nearly all modules are wrapped. A lot of tests are covering various functionality.

Please report it as a `Github Issue <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/issues>`_ if you find a bug. We are looking forward to contributions of new submodules, while maintaining the available code, and welcome `pull requests <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/pulls>`_.

PyGSL moved from Sourceforge to GitHub in 2021.

Requirements
------------

To build the interface, you will need

- `GSL 2.x <https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_
- `Python 3.x <https://python.org/>`_
- `NumPy <https://www.numpy.org/>`_
- an ANSI C compiler (e.g. gcc).

Installing PyGSL
----------------

Installing from a release archive
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, uninstall old versions of PyGSL. ``gsl-config`` must be on your path.

Make sure that the Python package ``wheel`` is installed:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip install wheel

It is needed by the PyGSL installer.

You can download a ``.tar.gz`` file of the latest PyGSL release at https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/releases. Then run:

.. code-block:: sh

   tar -xvzf pygsl-x.y.z.tar.gz
   cd pygsl-x.y.z
   python setup.py config
   sudo python setup.py install

This will install PyGSL system-wide; for a local install that does not require superuser privileges, specify an installation prefix, for example ``--prefix=/home/work/.local``.

To set the GSL location explicitly, use the argument ``--gsl-prefix=/path/to/gsl``.

PyGSL is installed to the Python packages path, and can be uninstalled by typing:

.. code-block:: sh

   rm -r <python install path>/lib/python<version>/site-packages/pygsl

Installation via PyPI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PyGSL can also be installed using the pip package installer. Simply type:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip install pygsl

To remove PyGSL, use:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip uninstall pygsl
   
Development installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pre-generated SWIG wrappers are included in the PyGSL release. To re-generate these wrappers, run:

.. code-block:: sh

   python setup.py gsl_wrappers

then continue with the rest of the installation steps (``config``, ``install``).

Using PyGSL
-----------

Do NOT test the interface in the distribution root directory! -- please
install it first and then change to the tests directory and execute ``python
run_test.py``. If you want to execute it in the distribution root directory,
please run ``python setup.py build_ext -i`` first! It will put the required
binary files into the ``pygsl`` directory.

Just write in Python

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.sf
   print("%g+/-%g"%pygsl.sf.erf(1))

or

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.rng
   rng=pygsl.rng.rng()
   print rng.gaussian(1.0)

You may set the environment variable ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` to find the gsl
shared object.

Supported Platforms
-------------------

- Linux with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x
- Mac OS X with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x
- Win32 with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x

but is supposed to compile and run on any posix platform.

Currently it is being tested using GitHub Actions continuous integration on:

- Python 3.8, numpy-latest and GSL 2.5 under Ubuntu Linux 20.04.


Testing
-------

The directory test will contain several testsuites, based on Python
unittest. Change to this directory to run the tests.

What is implemented (versus GSL 2.1):

- Blas
- BSplines
- Chebyshev
- Combination
- Const
- Diff
- Eigen
- Fit
- Ieee
- Integrate
- Interpolation
- Interpolation2D
- Linalg
- Math
- Minimize
- Multifit
- Multifit_nlin
- Multimin
- Multiroots
- Odeiv
- Permutation
- Poly
- Qrng
- Rng
- Roots
- Siman
- Sf
- Spline
- Statistics

What is not implemented yet (versus GSL 1.10)
---------------------------------------------

- GSL Capabilites not yet wrapped by PyGSL

    - Sorting
    - N-tuples

- GSL Capabilites partly implemented

    - Discrete Hankel Transforms

See also the TODO file in the distribution.

For the exact function volume for a module, please type:

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.sf
   dir(pygsl.sf)

You can do this with the other modules, too. The naming scheme is the same
as in GSL.

Documentation
-------------

The function reference can be found in the docstrings and at the gsl-reference.

Written documentation can be found in the ``doc/ref`` directory.

See also the ``examples`` directory.

Support
-------

Support requests and all other questions should be submitted as a `GitHub Issue <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/issues>`_.

Developement
------------

You can browse our `git repository <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl>`_.

If you want to contribute to PyGSL, please fork the repository and create a pull request.

The script tools/extract_tool.py generates most of the special function code.

History
-------

A GSL interface for Python was needed for a project at `Center for
applied informatics Cologne <http://www.zaik.uni-koeln.de/AFS>`_.

pygsl-0.0.3 was released on May 23, 2001.

Thanks
------

* Charl Linssen for continous integration
* Jochen Küpper for pygsl.statistics
* Fabian Jakobs for pygsl.blas, pygsl.eigen,
  pygsl.linalg and pygsl.permutation
* Leonardo Milano for rpm build support and test
* Eric Gurrola and Peter Stoltz for testing and supporting the port of
  pygsl to the MAC
* Sebastien Maret for supporting the Fink http://fink.sourceforge.net
  port of pygsl.
* Michael Forbes for Series Acceleration
* and all for support by providing feed back on testing or showing by
  email that the code is useful for them

Maintainers
-----------

PyGSL is currently maintained by `Achim Gaedke <mailto:achimgaedke@users.sourceforge.net>`_, `Pierre Schnizer <mailto:schnizer@users.sourceforge.net>`_ and `Charl Linssen <mailto:c.linssen@fz-juelich.de>`_.

Commit message:

fix PyPI install by explicitly requiring SWIG

README.rst, after:

PyGSL: Python interface for GNU Scientific Library
==================================================

PyGSL is a Python wrapper for the `GNU Scientific Library (GSL) <http://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_. Nearly all modules are wrapped. A lot of tests are covering various functionality.

Please report it as a `Github Issue <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/issues>`_ if you find a bug. We are looking forward to contributions of new submodules, while maintaining the available code, and welcome `pull requests <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/pulls>`_.

PyGSL moved from Sourceforge to GitHub in 2021.

Requirements
------------

To build the interface, you will need

- `GSL 2.x <https://www.gnu.org/software/gsl/>`_
- `Python 3.x <https://python.org/>`_
- `NumPy <https://www.numpy.org/>`_
- an ANSI C compiler (e.g. gcc).

Installing PyGSL
----------------

Installing from a release archive
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

First, uninstall old versions of PyGSL. ``gsl-config`` must be on your path.

Make sure that the Python package ``wheel`` is installed:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip install wheel

It is needed by the PyGSL installer.

You can download a ``.tar.gz`` file of the latest PyGSL release at https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/releases. Then run:

.. code-block:: sh

   tar -xvzf pygsl-x.y.z.tar.gz
   cd pygsl-x.y.z
   python setup.py config
   sudo python setup.py install

This will install PyGSL system-wide; for a local install that does not require superuser privileges, specify an installation prefix, for example ``--prefix=/home/work/.local``.

To set the GSL location explicitly, use the argument ``--gsl-prefix=/path/to/gsl``.

PyGSL is installed to the Python packages path, and can be uninstalled by typing:

.. code-block:: sh

   rm -r <python install path>/lib/python<version>/site-packages/pygsl

Installation via PyPI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PyGSL can also be installed using the pip package installer. SWIG is required to be installed and can usually be found via your distribution's package manager (for example, ``apt install swig``).

To install PyGSL from PyPI, simply type:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip install pygsl

To remove PyGSL, use:

.. code-block:: sh

   pip uninstall pygsl
   
Development installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Pre-generated SWIG wrappers are included in the PyGSL release. To re-generate these wrappers, run:

.. code-block:: sh

   python setup.py gsl_wrappers

then continue with the rest of the installation steps (``config``, ``install``).

Using PyGSL
-----------

Do NOT test the interface in the distribution root directory! -- please
install it first and then change to the tests directory and execute ``python
run_test.py``. If you want to execute it in the distribution root directory,
please run ``python setup.py build_ext -i`` first! It will put the required
binary files into the ``pygsl`` directory.

Just write in Python

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.sf
   print("%g+/-%g"%pygsl.sf.erf(1))

or

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.rng
   rng=pygsl.rng.rng()
   print rng.gaussian(1.0)

You may set the environment variable ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` to find the gsl
shared object.

Supported Platforms
-------------------

- Linux with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x
- Mac OS X with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x
- Win32 with Python 3.x and GSL 2.x

but is supposed to compile and run on any posix platform.

Currently it is being tested using GitHub Actions continuous integration on:

- Python 3.8, numpy-latest and GSL 2.5 under Ubuntu Linux 20.04.


Testing
-------

The directory test will contain several testsuites, based on Python
unittest. Change to this directory to run the tests.

What is implemented (versus GSL 2.1):

- Blas
- BSplines
- Chebyshev
- Combination
- Const
- Diff
- Eigen
- Fit
- Ieee
- Integrate
- Interpolation
- Interpolation2D
- Linalg
- Math
- Minimize
- Multifit
- Multifit_nlin
- Multimin
- Multiroots
- Odeiv
- Permutation
- Poly
- Qrng
- Rng
- Roots
- Siman
- Sf
- Spline
- Statistics

What is not implemented yet (versus GSL 1.10)
---------------------------------------------

- GSL Capabilites not yet wrapped by PyGSL

    - Sorting
    - N-tuples

- GSL Capabilites partly implemented

    - Discrete Hankel Transforms

See also the TODO file in the distribution.

For the exact function volume for a module, please type:

.. code-block:: python

   import pygsl.sf
   dir(pygsl.sf)

You can do this with the other modules, too. The naming scheme is the same
as in GSL.

Documentation
-------------

The function reference can be found in the docstrings and at the gsl-reference.

Written documentation can be found in the ``doc/ref`` directory.

See also the ``examples`` directory.

Support
-------

Support requests and all other questions should be submitted as a `GitHub Issue <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl/issues>`_.

Developement
------------

You can browse our `git repository <https://github.com/pygsl/pygsl>`_.

If you want to contribute to PyGSL, please fork the repository and create a pull request.

The script tools/extract_tool.py generates most of the special function code.

History
-------

A GSL interface for Python was needed for a project at `Center for
applied informatics Cologne <http://www.zaik.uni-koeln.de/AFS>`_.

pygsl-0.0.3 was released on May 23, 2001.

Thanks
------

* Charl Linssen for continous integration
* Jochen Küpper for pygsl.statistics
* Fabian Jakobs for pygsl.blas, pygsl.eigen,
  pygsl.linalg and pygsl.permutation
* Leonardo Milano for rpm build support and test
* Eric Gurrola and Peter Stoltz for testing and supporting the port of
  pygsl to the MAC
* Sebastien Maret for supporting the Fink http://fink.sourceforge.net
  port of pygsl.
* Michael Forbes for Series Acceleration
* and all for support by providing feed back on testing or showing by
  email that the code is useful for them

Maintainers
-----------

PyGSL is currently maintained by `Achim Gaedke <mailto:achimgaedke@users.sourceforge.net>`_, `Pierre Schnizer <mailto:schnizer@users.sourceforge.net>`_ and `Charl Linssen <mailto:c.linssen@fz-juelich.de>`_.
